as diversity becomes more and more of a
sticking point in our social landscape
discourse around representation follows
close behind there is a precedent for
developing an incorrect narrative around
romanticized historical events
presenting sentiments that simply don't
represent a community as a whole and
struggling to actively showcase visible
representation or understand what
qualifies as visible representation and
of course when you do get representation
right you actually have to go to the
right lengths
to promote it just like you would any
other property but that said it's not
like good representation doesn't exist
usually when the people who are being
represented get to make their own stuff
it tends to be well received sometimes
not whether I agree with the response or
not but usually if you exist within the
queer Community you generally have a
better understanding of how to Showcase
these people what matters to them what
their values are and what you can even
make fun of
without insulting everyone and believe
me the queer Community has a heap of
that for instance trans men and envies
for some reason really like rats like
pet rats a lot of them feel this way and
nobody knows why though for people who
are not queer themselves but who do want
to create queer characters there are a
range of challenges that they face such
as limited perspective straight writers
by virtue of their own sexual
orientation likely don't have first-hand
experience with the unique challenges
emotions and nuances that queer
individuals face and cultural
sensitivity and accuracy straight
writers might lack this cultural
sensitivity leading to
misrepresentations or inaccurate
depictions that fail to capture the
essence of queer lives the potential for
unintentional insensitivity can arise
from a lack of research or an
over-reliance on current mainstream
media representations there's also the
fear of offending this fear may lead
them to tiptoe around important issues
or sanitize the experience of queer
characters resulting in narratives that
lack depth and emotional resonance and
there's stereotyping and tokenism when
queer characters are reduced to being
nothing but their sexual orientation or
gender identity becoming defined solely
by this one part of themselves rather
than their personalities aspirations and
complexities and this is perhaps true of
all categories of diverse characters
however there is a recent Buzz around
queerness both from consumers and
producers and through this Buzz we've
seen the good
the Bad and the Ugly and while queer
creators are finally getting a chance to
tell their own stories straight creators
can struggle to deliver these same
messages
though that being said
why is Neil Gaiman so good at it
Neil Gaiman typifies a sort of literary
polymorph where in spite of his cultural
impact he has written or contributed to
a total of only 11 novels however
factoring in his work and screenplays
teleplays Comics children's books and
non-fiction Gaiman has a considerable
library of work including the creation
of a certain dark-haired magical boy
with an owl familiar which was
suspiciously published through DC Comics
seven years prior to Harry Potter
hitting the shelves
must be magic granted I say only 11
novels as if even that isn't impressive
whereas once it was not considered out
of the ordinary to be invited into
literary canon with far less than 11
published works that's usually not
possible today unless of course one
comes from money or is the one new
author of a decade that the publishing
industry has decided to Rally behind but
especially as far as high profile
writers go Gaiman has peppered his
library of works with a broad range of
diverse characters representing a myriad
of Life Experiences similar to the
forced wokeness accusations that were
hurled at the rings of power which
focused more on gender and race than the
broad changes to the characters in
mythology the Netflix adaptation of
gaiman's iconic Sandman series was given
the same criticism from the predictable
kinds of people the displeasure at
seeing queer experiences on the screen
clearly indicated that these particular
critics
hadn't read The Source material maybe
they just looked at the pictures
gaiman's Renown as a writer truly began
in 1990 when he co-authored good Omens
with literary giant Terry Pratchett
according to Legend Neil pitched the
idea to Pratchett offhand at a
convention to which Pratchett seemed
agreeable though Neil assumed that he
was just being let down gently and put
it out of his mind sometime later Neil
got a phone call from Pratchett who
wanted to know how this misplaced
Antichrist idea might play out insofar
as the authors developed this Cosmos
neither angels nor demons have sex
organs nor do they actively seek out
sexual intercourse and by all accounts
gender is more or less described based
on how an observer might categorize them
regardless even of that this he they
angel demon Duo are so incredibly
married it was basically a joke even at
the time of good omen's publication
while many fans of the show and even of
the book were quick to describe a
xerophail which is a fictional name
approved by spellcheck believe it or not
and Crowley as a gay couple it was
indeed exasperated by gaiman's
description of the tale Trail as a love
story and yet both God the narrator of
the story and Gaiman are hesitant to use
the term gay to describe them but unlike
your average Network Executive Press
Conference or corporate social media
account this explanation is queerer than
the typical just friends cop-out the
narrator describes that most people who
encounter aziraphail May describe him as
quote gayer than a tree full of monkeys
on nitrous oxide but does not describe
his earphale as gay himself Gaiman
elaborated that the love story between
aziraphal and Crowley is not gay because
neither of them are men one is an Angel
and the other a demon neither of whom
are beings that have sex traits and any
ambiguity in the first story is
dismissed in the second you're a good
ladder not actually either this suggests
that any element of gender expression is
the result of self-identification or a
matter of how Others May observe them
furthermore the celestial beings seem to
refer to each other by they them from an
authorial standpoint this is a complex
understanding of gender and sexuality
that is even a little bit theoretical
for many within the community itself if
there is no element of sex or gender
present in a romantic pairing how can we
describe the sexual orientation of the
couple the unfortunate thing about the
term homosexual is that it describes not
only the gender of the subject's
attraction but the gender of the subject
as well
homosexual same gender attraction you
need to have a gender to be attracted to
the same gender as the public begins to
understand and accept a separation of
sex and gender many of these sexual
labels fail to describe what they are
meant to an amab trans non-binary person
who's attracted to high feminine gender
traits among gay men
we don't have language to describe that
yet factor in that both aziraphale and
Crowley have a very ambiguous set of
gendered mannerisms and expressions
Gaiman has stated that they don't really
know what gender is about but they do
their best to emulate it to their own
understanding humans are weird and
that's how it works I knew that
ironically this may actually be an
instance where homosexual actually would
apply but even that depends entirely on
if homosexual is compatible with asexual
homo romantic but again in terms of
gender non-conformity the gender of one
person is not relevant to describe the
attraction to another out of all the
psychological terminology that came out
of the 1800s that has become archaic why
are we still holding on to these terms
as if our personhood depends on them
don't answer that I I know why I've
tried to make that video like seven
times now you know I got like sevens
however instead of engaging in a debate
about how we identify Cosmic beings
trying their best to humanely live their
best eternities Gaiman simply avoids the
discussion altogether not that he
excludes queerness from a reading of
these characters they're certainly not
straight but their place in queerness is
not worth categorizing Beyond
queer not even LGBT because they fit
none of those categories the first
season of good Omens was a show that had
a couple our angel and demon of some
Renown at the center of it though no
confirmation came in season one
anyone with a brain could see it and
season two
became a queer show in order to deter an
investigation from Heaven Crowley and
aziraphel need to Stage a love story
Maggie is a lonely record saleswoman who
has a strong crush on Nina the
overworked owner of a cafe Nina however
is already in a relationship we never
meet her partner but through text
messages we have a clear indication that
not everything's coming up Rose is there
Nina's girlfriend is so intensely
jealous it likely crosses into emotional
abuse we aren't put on any kind of
pedestal here we have the same kind of
relationship problems that straight
people have however as much as Maggie is
Lovesick and Nina is stressed out over a
relationship that turns into a messy
breakup neither of them are defined by
their attraction to the other their
personhood is primary over their
queerness and neither are justified by
romantic attractions Nina smartly
decides that immediately after a breakup
is not a good time to get emotionally
invested with another woman
which is sound psychological advice
coming out of Fantastical queer fiction
good on you this is secondary only to
the romance between aziraphale and
Crowley which is split up in the end
because the Damned Angel suddenly gets a
hard-on for a promotion you idiot
we could have been
us Damon has smaller roles for queerness
as well a sketchy Scotsman openly
professes that he uses his phone only
for Grindr and the owner of a magic shop
references an anniversary with his
partner who he brings to zero Fell
Street Business Association meeting
partner being an apt genderless
descriptor because his partner is
visibly androgynous in fact throughout
the season characters typically stick to
non-gender descriptions of relations and
individuals something that I imagined
most people wouldn't even notice unless
they have it pointed out to them and
considering that neither angels nor
demons have gender in the first place
the romance between bl's above and
Gabriel would be queer in spite of their
actors genders as far as what I've read
of gaiman's works this seems to be by
far his queerist and while I'm not
complaining this level of brazen in your
face queerness is a little bit out of
character for him
[Music]
thank you
though he does his best to quietly
present visible queer identities without
making a big fuss about throwing in
Surprise lesbians he likes troubled
lesbians and people without genders one
of the greatest strengths of gaming as a
writer is his signature quiet Nuance in
prose even when he's conveying important
messaging or perhaps in regard to queer
representation he may not have realized
just how important that was beginning in
Sandman there is of course desire in the
fictional world of Sandman in
conjunction with the actual deities of
our human history there exists seven
beings who represent Universal aspects
of The Human Experience they are shape
shifters whose physical appearance
changes depending upon who is observing
them certainly makes it easy for artists
and casting directors functioning as a
family of siblings rather than a proper
Pantheon they are called the endless and
endless though they may be there is an
order to their births Destiny the eldest
predates the existence of all life and
functions as a constant for all things
in the universe in all Cosmic Realms
people beings deities and celestial
bodies whereas the other endless except
for perhaps death have limitation on
their Authority death is the second
visually inspired by cinnamon Hadley
death existed the moment the first
living thing was born and will vanish
when the last living thing closes its
eyes makes sense as death represents the
cosmic determinism of all living things
in spite of her simple Gothic appearance
her manner is more akin to a death Doula
or palliative care nurse and while she
is a universal her only rule is that all
things end but can be flippant a bit
when that happens dream the central
figure of the Sandman series though not
always the protagonist was born next he
represents higher thought processes that
living things experience mostly
imagination dreams domain seems to be
where reality and Imagination intersect
what from The Real World is brought into
his realm and how things from his realm
can become reality and how everyone is
if he isn't running a tight ship
gods and other deities are suggested to
have derived from dream's realm or not
it's fairly vague probably deliberately
the next is referred to as the prodigal
who has been wandering for some time and
almost nobody knows where he is younger
still are the twins desire being being
the secondary antagonist of the Netflix
series The behind the scenes string
puller of all things disturbing
desire was and has remained non-binary
though back in the day desire was
referred to as it rather than they them
in the Netflix series in a mythological
and literary history of depicting the
personification of lust and sex as a
contemporarily beautiful woman this
speaks to a masculine-centric society
where the only individuals for whom
desire matters is men to make desire
either or any gender would exclude the
people for whom that particular
expression of physical beauty is not the
object of desire there's also an
argument to be made that might suggest
that desires pronouns are better as it
because desire and fetishization are
dehumanizing but desire the character is
also the personification of even
non-sexual desire if you want something
or anything no matter how badly this is
desire's realm desire's twin is despair
kind of a younger twin is complicated
despair is the personification of
exactly what she seems to be the gateway
to her realm is mirror and her sigil is
a hook very fitting visual indicators
the youngest of the Endless is delirium
who was born Delight again it's
complicated and everyone in the family
respects both desires pronouns and
delirium's name change it's difficult to
say how faithful Sandman will remain to
its source material we only have one
season adapted from two story arcs and a
large number of the comics are one-off
stories about humans who encounter the
endless though the streaming series was
exceptionally true to the comics
published three decades prior and I'm
sorry to you Neil if you're watching
this for my overuse of words and phrases
like years decades illustrious career
long ago inspiration for new generations
plural I don't really like thinking
about how long ago Jurassic Park was
released and
how I saw it in theaters
but it's important to recognize the
historical context for how these queer
ideas were being not only teased but
explored in intense taken for granted
ways at a time before the majority of
the viewer base of this video had even
been born sorry again Neil whereas today
we have an almost direct adaptation of
Sandman via streaming and it is decried
as pandering to wokeness whereas it's
basically just the same as it was in the
comics with just a bit more gay though
that said I have a feeling that Gaiman
was treating the Netflix adaptation as
an opportunity to give Sandman a go over
and bring even more of his initial
Vision to life there is an expressed
comfort with casting black actors for
roles that had been white in the comics
and with showcasing a deeper expression
of the queer experience sorry bro these
teeny tiny sunglasses stay on during sex
and that's okay
I'm okay with that
honestly not so Ambiguously Camp men
wearing blackout sunglasses to conceal
weird eyes seems to be a fixation for
Gaiman and
ocular facsimiles in general it seems as
if all of the base content from the
first two arcs of Sandman made it into
the first season changes made to this
content were primarily a matter of
streamlining the existing information
pacing was smoothed out or characters
were altered or combined to fit into
roles that serve the plot better John
Constantine was altered into Joanna
Constantine riffing on the fictual 18th
century character in later Sandman
stories Hector and lydo were repurposed
so that Lyda could occupy a larger role
and to allow for more connecting tissue
between characters Rose's mother was the
only character cut from the plot with
Lyda now occupying much of that role
instead Lyda absolutely needed to be
here because that dream baby is
important the nightmares brute and glob
were replaced by another nightmare
entirely Galt this is the most
significant change as it portends
directly towards character development
for dream that was not present in the
comics at all or at least development
that takes much longer in the comics
it's worth noting however that there is
simply much more Sandman content in the
Netflix series than the corresponding
Comics the existing narrative was beef
up to flush out a whole season unlike
the Final Fantasy 7 remake however the
padding here doesn't seem as apparent in
fact if you're reading the comics after
watching the series you may find that
some of the most outstanding moments are
missing altogether the padding in the
series outside of the adjustments I
mentioned earlier mesh so well into the
Netflix adaptation because they seem to
be flushing out side plots that simply
were never explored in the comics though
strongly indicated and it may shock you
to know that these expanded indicated
plots
we're about queer people
not to say that they weren't there but
Rose's foyer to a drag Club was only
really suggested in the comics whereas
Netflix gave it an entire musical number
in drag I mean if you're gonna cast John
Cameron Mitchell why not and not all the
praise goes to game it Alan heinberg was
brought on as a co-writer for the series
you can learn more about him in the
power couples video from February of
forever ago heinberg himself is an
openly gay writer with a Strong pedigree
in both comics and screenwriting Gaiman
has always expressed an openness to
queer depictions but the Netflix series
likely with the help of heinberg
expanded them a little
or a lot Additionally the gender swap of
Joanna Constantine which was likely done
to sever this from any variant of DC
adapted interconnected universes smart
move to avoid them at all costs at this
point also made her a lesbian a very
messy lesbian my favorite kind of
lesbian granted nothing about the story
was changed except the magical person's
gender yes there are some human elements
that are true to both straight and queer
relationships and that truth is people
are the diner sequence was also
expanded in general but primarily
featuring additional queer people very
messy queer people though certainly even
if we're depicted making mistakes we
ought to recognize that these are the
kinds of mistakes that straight people
also make rose has a gay friend who
Sexes the concept of inhuman masquerade
and consumption of identity in the
comics the Corinthian like to stick to
murdering gay men and while there were a
lot of gays to unbury making the
Corinthian more indiscriminate about his
victims and adding another gay side
character who just gets to be a person
was a comfortable correction though as
for the Corinthian in general we have a
Serial killing monster who appears as a
gay man on that have cost to stir in the
queer Community I mean for all the
real-life serial killers and mass
Shooters who are straight white men our
cultural Consciousness certainly likes
to hold on to the gay ones and the women
this seems Rife for the kind of content
that would trigger our delicate
snowflake sensibilities especially in a
cultural Echo chamber for which the
choir sings you just can't say anything
anymore with increasingly vivacious
intensity pitching a plot where the
primary antagonist is a Serial killing
gay and or bisexual presenting man
really ought to have made the woke
police put a stop to this you know I
guess that's the only underfunded police
force if this wave of apparent left-wing
censorship was as strong as critics to
cry then Sandman would have been purged
from DC archives and yet instead Neil
Gaiman is held up by a substantial queer
fan base many of whom celebrate him for
exposing them to certain areas of
queerness in the first place perhaps you
can say anything actually
and turns out that how you say something
and who you are to say it is more
important than what is said in the 1990s
the Corinthian targeted gays because
police were almost certainly never going
to involve themselves in a rash of
murdered vagrant gay men it was playing
on the reality of the situation in a
very real way however cultural
sensibilities have since shifted but
still he himself is an instance of a
very very bad piece of queer
representation regardless of how we
human people can identify nightmares as
queer which maybe gaiman's saving Nuance
here he is a monster taking the form of
a gay man to hunt them and even though
there are a few benign queer characters
in Sandman the deck is stacked with
morally gray or messy queer characters
not to mention desire's role as the
primordial demon twink my apologies if
twink is an unsuitable descriptor for
non-binary people but I
yeah look at them I couldn't exist and
quite frankly to the anti-woke folks
they are right
if this was your average high budget
built by committee TV spectacle series
these plot elements would absolutely get
shot down by the producers on paper
these beats are way too zesty media that
explicitly villainizes queer people is
held to be another component of language
from the 1990s Executives aren't exactly
known for nuance so they tend to build
blanket rules for do's and don'ts and
yet the Corinthian and desire are still
here and people may be thirsty for them
regardless the diner lesbian with a
temper is here all of John Constantine's
male messiness is now Joanna's Sapphic
messiness and still Gaiman maintains his
staunch Bowie s queer following so if
the woke police did come for Gaiman what
was his get out of jail free card
it's conceptually simple
though actually quite complicated
the simple explanation is you have to
care a lot and Care is demonstrated not
something that you can just declare
politicians say they care about lots of
things but demonstrate very little when
it comes to problematic queer characters
and for those of us who are queer we
know many problematic queer people this
is not explicitly forbidden but it is
kind of taboo while Gaiman made a bold
start with Sandman he still had an
affectionate portrayal of an
indescribably queer romance and good
Omens generally speaking demonstrating
positive queer folks in one work will
implore your audience to read Nuance
into the messy queers in another
regardless of just those two Gaiman has
been incorporating not only queer
characters but even queer adjacent
themes into his body of work ever since
the most infamous outside of his
earphalon Crowley anyway was the
notorious deified gay sex scene in
American Gods a burnt out salesman from
the Middle East struggles with his time
in America while trying to Pedal goods
for an ungrateful family while in a taxi
he relates to the driver how hard it is
to keep up a smile in the land of
opportunity the pair become quite close
through the ride the cab driver it turns
out is a Jinn who immigrated to America
well provided the lore of American Gods
it was the idea of a Jinn who made the
migration a different version of the
same if it likely still exists in his
homeland it's complicated anyway they
smash turns out they're both kind of
equally dissatisfied with how things are
going the Gin is nowhere to be found the
morning after but has left his taxi
driver's identification on the
nightstand
only now with the salesman's face for
the picture an opportunity for a new
life away from his oppressive family
even though it's just a disconnected
vignette and a story it's still a
heartfelt standout moment you may be
deceived into thinking this is about
being gay but it's actually about being
different and alone in a place with too
many people especially in our Post 9 11
Western cultural stereotype of the
Arabian peninsula
it's significant to make this the spot
for graphic gay sex in this great
American novel don't read anything into
it most of the Great American novels are
written by Brits it's important to
remember that at a period of time when
Europe was tying up women and gay men
and throwing them into reasonably sized
ponds to see if they floated to the
surface thereby indicating their
connection to Witchcraft for which they
would then be removed from the water
thoroughly dried and then burnt at the
stake that Constantinople at the same
time was the cultural Progressive Hub of
the world scientifically culturally
philosophically artistically it also
possessed a massive swath of Europeans
who had fled as refugees from whatever
Inquisition Crusade or ethnic cleansing
was going on in Continental Europe at
the time the reason why I would say that
this and other instances of gaiman's
queer Library performed so strongly is
that there's very little sensationalism
regarding these characters that is he
doesn't really make a fuss about queer
characters where we appear we're just
there there is nothing about the
exchange that says oh look gay
characters they're just characters and
then gay stuff happens sometimes but
mostly they're just characters who
contribute to what he's trying to say
the same purpose he has for straight
characters granted Gaiman also includes
eluded queer characters in his books and
generally I'm annoyed by eluded
characters however when Coraline is told
from the perspective of a nine-year-old
the protagonist isn't really going to
read into why the two bickering elderly
actresses in the basement flat are
living together again I'm only opposed
to the illusion of queerness if it's a
crutch used to present the illusion to
impressionable baby queers that they're
being seen as Gaiman has demonstrated a
comfort level with queer characters a
decision to imply that these two
characters are lesbians is based off of
artistic Vision rather than an
uncertainty about the audience like With
Yuri on Ice taking a moment away from
the narrative flow to specify that these
characters fall under the queer umbrella
would interrupt the underlying themes if
there ought to be a definition of forced
inclusion then that would be it Coraline
is about a child developing the ability
to recognize identity in other people
this woman is my mother because of X
this other woman who only looks like my
mother is not actually my mother and as
it is a children's book having more
themes presented will detract from what
young readers are meant to take away
from it and this is part of the
consequences of being part of a
community that has been so gaslit into
believing that half-assed inclusion can
qualify as representation any instance
of representation needs to feature that
rough gay sex scene or just doesn't
count there needs to be that soapbox
moment where the gay characters stand up
and make a Love Is Love Speech there
needs to be that gratuitously horny gay
character who is either desperate for a
long-term relationship or hits on
everything incessantly to let the
audience know that he's gay do any of
you realize how many comments I still
get on the Yuri on Ice video to this day
aggressively arguing that the anime is
bad representation because you don't see
lips touching during the kiss then again
that video still gets comments from
usually straight women no hating but
still who incessantly deny that there is
any queerness coded or otherwise present
in that series the pressure to exist as
openly gay as Paul possible in fiction
has a toxic translation to real life
most gay people don't think about their
gayness and ways to perpetuate it
especially because these methods of
self-promotion as established in fiction
Focus around either having or trying to
get a committed boyfriend or persevering
over social pressures and persecution
according to fiction the only two gay
Milestones that matter are coming out
and boyfriend and I have concerns for
this community if we are internalizing
these messages doubling back to good
Omens for a minute how is it possible in
this circumstance for these characters
to fit into clearly defined visible
representation they can't slash don't
have sex their genders are complete
anachronistic chaos and they don't
appear to experience physical pleasure
kissing is a gesture Kneel To Angels and
Demons have a concentration of nerve
endings in their lips which result in a
pleasant sensation upon physical
stimulation you you make up the rules
about this so I'm just wondering what
would it take for these two to properly
depict gay or queer attitudes I highly
doubt a Cosmic entity would go on about
love being loved especially when their
relationship revolves around the world
ending or not especially when the
majority of anti-gay discrimination
revolves around persecuting sexual acts
however I would prefer we don't say that
this is bad representation because these
are two very queer characters involved
in a non-sexual romance and since
asexual people do exist believe it or
not I think that's pretty valid and so
no not all representation needs to be
about queer acceptance or normalization
sometimes it's nice to just see yourself
in a quirky character that isn't to say
that's all we need to be sometimes we
really do need messaging directed at us
in messaging that normalizes us Caiman
also happens to have some of that too
though in Sandman no less
granted this is regarding a trans
character and as per contemporary
discussions about appropriate trans
representation there are some pitfalls I
wouldn't want to try and tell trans
people what is or is not good
representation for them though from what
I've read people seem to feel generally
positive about this one Possible season
two spoilers ahead the game of you Arc
of Sandman follows Barbara Barbie from
season one who journeyed with Martin ten
bones to bring the porpentine to the
hierogram and who has since broken up
with Ken she is best friends with Wanda
who is helping her figure out how to
navigate New York City Wanda is trans
and though she never specifies to anyone
I am trans this becomes apparent
throughout dialogue cues Wanda is
talkative and we get a small glimpse
into her trans experience though she
remains externally positive she trusts
Barbara enough to let her dead name slip
the warns Barbara never to use it an
antagonist doesn't seem to approve of
her though she can ignore him though
Gaiman is subtle enough to indicate that
these bigoted remarks and encounters
have an effect on her and by subtle I'm
mean that she has a dream where Bizarro
aliens are forcing her to choose to be a
man or a woman decisions around gender
affirming surgeries are ultimately at
the decision of the individual to
undertake or not her dream indicates
that she is struggling internally with
the pressure to make a commitment
through the progression of this story
Wanda's Womanhood is routinely
challenged because she is uncomfortable
with the idea of surgery at least at
this point in her life Wanda does die in
the story and while this may fit into a
buried queer Trope it's worth noting
that Wanda does not die because of
bigotry she dies when her building
collapses in a freak hurricane which may
or may not have been caused by
witchcraft it's also worth noting that
Wanda's death is not there to make the
CIS characters react or to make the
audience sad Barbara has already
undergone an emotional Arc in her
appearance at Wanda's Southern Funeral
her only New York friend to appear is to
pay respects and crossout Wanda's dead
name on her tombstone and write her name
over it in flamingo pink lipstick
however death has a different function
in the Sandman Series where death is a
character herself and one may argue that
death functions differently in all of
gaiman's Works Gaiman in general is very
nonchalant about death even when a
character dies to propel the plot
there's very little sensation derived
from it sometimes people die in fact in
the graveyard book most of the
characters are dead Gaiman treats death
in fiction as if it is not the end of a
character and this is very literal in
Sandman in this world most people who
die are taken by death to her Realm a
place the panels do not take us we
understand that just like any other
character Wanda woke after her death and
was greeted by a compassionate woman to
take her away but death is comfortable
bending the rules just a little bit very
Case by case basis Barbara has a dream
and she remembers from this dream seeing
Wanda
Wanda here in death
is fully feminized
and no this isn't telling us that death
will make everything better this is
visual language to indicate that the
cosmic forces of the universe recognize
your identity for who you are
it's the same message of the entire
Sandman series emotional reality is more
significant Than Physical reality which
is a hell of a debate to include in a
comic book written by a CIS man like
holy can you imagine any of that
happening today Mark the calendar and
count the days until Wanda appears in a
trailer for an upcoming season a Sandman
and people immediately to cry
everything's being about trans stuff
these days however I did say that this
is a complicated process and Gaiman
especially in the long long ago before
Reddit would have had to have had some
real conversations with trans people to
really understand how to convey these
themes the best of intentions is not
enough and in spite of Good Intentions
things can go awry a category of that
contains Thomas Harris in his novel
Silence of the Lambs the trans
representation is
lacking
the movie especially because it offers
no insight into trans attitudes at all
in spite of depicting the villain
the way they did
the book actually goes to Great length
to describe trans women and in fact
exonerate them Hannibal Lecter goes so
far as to suggest that Jane Gum cannot
be trans because they are violent Harris
describes trans women as people who
transition to being women to live as
women and for no other reason but
regardless of the fact that Harris does
go out of his way to try and say the
trans people are okay what is depicted
in the book sends a very harmful message
I would claim that Thomas Harris is
someone who is trying to do a good thing
because the novel contains unambiguous
language which declares that trans women
are not violent or anti-social without
exception even if you kind of failed at
presenting that this is what he wrote I
would contrast that with something like
Ace Ventura which is actively malicious
belittling and hateful forgive the
archaic phrasing but Hannibal says that
ballet is not a real transsexual
but he thinks he is he tries to be he's
trying to be a lot of things I expect
gum was described as a disqualified
outlier who fetishized Womanhood rather
than someone who felt that they actually
were a woman if that makes sense it
doesn't really it's an e for effort
situation really because there is a lot
wrong with this yes Harris seems to want
to implore his audience to observe trans
people with more empathy while
presenting a villain who is trans
identifying and without incorporating
any other trans characters into the
story whatsoever not even to
counterbalance Buffalo Bill this is all
we got and what pro-trans rhetoric there
was in the novel was not so present in
the film in conjunction Harris
incorporates a deeply triggering element
of the trans experience in the book a
CIS doctor making claims about what does
or does not qualify as Womanhood there
is a precedent for Built Tough trans
women who have to pretend to be deeply
invested in pretty flowery dresses to
get past their doctors contemporary
queer Theory and this is even present in
gaiman's discourse around Wanda holds
the gender is self-defined the only
qualification to be a man woman or other
is for you to feel that way trying to
justify your gender to a medical
professional has been historically one
of the most arduous parts of the trans
experience even though I would not
recommend diying your endocrine system
without a medical professional I feel
the onus needs to be put on the medical
community to establish more trust many
Physicians are working hard to mend this
Gap yes but there's still progress to be
made a lot Harris however is notorious
shut-in it's clear that he garnished his
information from academic sources rather
than the living breathing component of a
culture if you're trying to represent
people then the people you want to
represent need to be where you start
however a good intentions alone cannot
and should not exonerate harm that was
brought into the world so if just caring
isn't enough
how much more complicated does it need
to be
the more complicated reality of good
representation is that it's very
difficult cocktail of empathy as it
intersects with the willingness to
listen a compulsion to profess the
ability to reflect on certain people and
situations their lies and ability to
isolate what elements of those
experiences are endearing to reflect
back upon those people while having an
understanding of what is or can be a
universal experience and what is or can
be fictionalized for instance when it
comes to men writing women there was
either not a whole lot of attention
given to female characters in the first
place or failed attempts to understand
them Helen of Troy was attributed to
having spurred Menelaus and sparked the
Trojan War because Perros of Troy was
just so darn pretty that motivation was
so weak even 2004's Troy had to develop
an entire subplot about how Menelaus was
so toxic that Helen's only recourse was
to leave with the first man who could
smuggle her at asparta men literally
have fictionalized women as accessories
to men because historically patriarchal
values in society would Define that as
the role of woman it was only in the
last century or so that a woman could
open a bank account without a man
signing for it be it her father her
brother husband or gay best friend for
which he would still have unbridled
access to it in much of fiction women
spend their time fussing over a man or
dramatically falling into his arms
without any personal goals or
motivations except to be with a
particular man even perceptively strong
female characters like Scarlett O'Hara
in the end
are solely focused on a man that isn't
to say that you can't have men who
develop excellent fictional women in
history but at the same time there is no
guarantee that women are going to write
excellent female characters either woman
is not a monolithic experience for which
every aspect of Womanhood is accessible
to every woman no one woman can embody
all the experiences within their gender
but when you belong to one particular
experience you may have an easier time
extrapolating on different
manifestations of that experience I can
imagine myself as a different man
because those experiences are
tangentially related to my experiences
it's not that it's more difficult per se
for a CIS man to write a female
character however it does require a
great deal more research empathy and
observation Stephen King is pretty good
at this there's a reason why his first
novel Carrie has become a regular in
feminist Theory classes and queer Theory
watch my video on deep cuts to find out
why he's also great at writing female
villains like with misery but when it
usually comes to villains well that's
rough especially in America audiences
tend to lean towards the idea that the
protagonist is the character whose
values are meant to be emulated the
antagonist by contrast is demonized
which typically holds that everything
about the antagonist is a problem and
ought to be shunned back to Gaiman how
is it that the weird queer kids flock to
him in spite of desire and the
Corinthian or other less than flattering
queer characters especially when he does
not have a great deal of openly queer
Heroes the key there is that these
characters are villains because of their
objectives and motivations but they are
not villains because they're queer and
they are not villains because of their
queerness and it's true of most queer
villains lately too we're beginning to
make a comeback as villains because of
this not so simple trick and truly being
able to have a character's motivations
separated from their identity
isn't a talent every writer has though
it's far from the only important Talent
out there but for those who can deliver
it generally makes for a better
character to have intersectional
compartments of their personhood
the secret to representation at its core
is not to represent if representation is
the goal it's going to suck the
objective needs to be life the author is
not to look at themselves as a Creator
but a gatekeeper their role is to allow
identities to be found where they are in
real life to show the hypothetical lives
these people may lead to create an
imagined version of this person based on
the kinds of people who live like this
and it can't come from nothing the best
fiction is plagiarism of life even if
it's fantasy especially if it's fantasy
because if your protagonists are
jousting on griffins or discovering
Ancient Aliens under the ice caps the
reader needs something human to grab
onto they really can only truly imagine
something incredible the more they can
imagine a real person doing it I
highlighted the queer element of
American Gods very deliberately it was a
queer reference to a matter of a
pansexual deity that is very heavily
supported by documented historical
reality given the current a cultural
climate of this world that reality is
selectively forgotten we are disinclined
to portray or even remember that because
it does not align with our present day
perspective of the world gaiman's
positive betrayal of queer people begins
with this he forces others to remember
what they willfully forget it seems to
be part of the quintessential queer
experience if others like me had existed
then others like me must exist now
Gaiman Works to spell out a Fantastical
realm of Dreams where reality waffles
and Imagination runs wild all things are
possible because the only rules that
exist in this place are the rules you
bring to it we spend one third of our
lives in this world of Dreams why
wouldn't we want to spend it all there
surely we can imagine a world where all
the dour Grand challenges of our lives
and societies become Petty grievances
that can be ignored
we can be anything do anything so much
more than the limitations of our own
world where we must share the dream of a
sleeping God
our realities are at odds with others
and an absolute truth for one is not an
absolute truth for all
however there is a pivotal weakness to
the dreaming and a pivotal limitation to
dreams Powers though vast they may seem
dreams are lonely places
when we sleep we are solitary save for
the odd ghosts drifting through
our dreams we confront the possibility
of what the world could be
the world as we would make it if we
could
the world as we would most fear it to
become
dreams cannot be our reality because
Dreams Are Meant to reflect reality and
we can look at them as Idol
entertainment or we could think of it
like slipping into a different existence
in a change room just to see how it
looks though the advantage of Dreams is
that we can make them real
in a fashion
we can take what we like and work to
make it true we can ward off what we
fear we can explore the fringes of our
imagination in a way our waking Minds
would dismiss as Idol fantasy
the extent of the world we want to
create doesn't need to end in dreams
dreams are a mirror that can reflect the
future
for all that we create our dreams
without thinking it's still possible
though challenging to create our reality
though it is easier to create a world we
all dream of together
having a dream is not teasing a reality
that could never be
it becomes an obligation
to make it come true
[Music]
thank you